---
title: Lab 10 - Config Management
layout: lab
---

## Overview
For this lab, we will be installing and configuring a Minecraft server.

For security reasons, the default configuration I have provided does not allow connections from the global internet,
only from localhost. You do not need to have Minecraft to sucessfully complete this lab. To test that your server is
running, run `ss -tulpn` and ensure that there is an entry for 127.0.0.1:25565.

To connect to your server from a Minecraft client, you can change `server-ip` to `0.0.0.0` in `server.properties`, or
you can port forward with the following options to ssh, and connect to `localhost` in Minecraft:

```ssh -NL 25535:localhost:25535 <your decal vm here>```

## Part 1: Installing Puppet

First, we’re going to install Puppet. Feel free to simply copy the commands below to set up Puppet. Make sure to copy the whole thing!

```
wget https://apt.puppetlabs.com/puppet6-release-bionic.deb && \
sudo dpkg -i puppet6-release-bionic.deb && \
sudo apt-get update && \
sudo apt-get -y install puppet
```

## Part 2: Using Puppet

Make a `minecraft.pp` anywhere, which will configure and run a Minecraft Server. To run your puppet code, use
sudo `puppet apply minecraft.pp`. Puppet, being declarative, will do nothing if the system is already configured
properly, so __run puppet early and often__ to detect bugs as soon as possible.

Useful references are this section are the
[Puppet documentation](https://puppet.com/docs/puppet/5.5/puppet_index.html) and there is a lot of sample code
avaliable in the [OCF Puppet configuration](https://github.com/ocf/puppet). When you are stuck, looking at existing code
and see how they did things will generally be helpful.

### Part a: Making a Home Directory and a User

Put the following code into `minecraft.pp`:

```puppet
file { '/home/minecraft'
  ensure => 'directory',
}
```
Run `sudo puppet apply minecraft.pp` to apply it, and ensure that the `/home/minecraft` directory was created.

Inside `minecraft.pp`, write some Puppet code to create a user named `minecraft`, that the Minecraft server will run under.
The `minecraft` user should have home directory `/home/minecraft`.
Now modify the code creating `/home/minecraft` to set owner the owner to `minecraft` user you just made. Note that
this should happen *after* the user is created.

Hint: Use `requires =>`.

Make sure to test your code by running `sudo puppet apply minecraft.pp`!

### Part b: Install java

Add a few lines to `minecraft.pp` to install the `default-jre` package.

### Part c: Installing the Minecraft Server configuration

Copy paste the contents of https://gist.githubusercontent.com/fydai/df26a7109a20ad6872fe63a8d1c2651e/raw/f20da967e554d2fa50f77376254a3e2894d220b9/server.properites locally into a file named `server.properties`

Ensure that `/home/minecraft/server.properties` contains the contents of the `server.properties` you just saved. Make sure
that you are using an __absolute__ path, Puppet is not particularly happy about relative paths.

Hint: Use the `file` function!

Read and agree to the [Minecraft EULA](https://account.mojang.com/documents/minecraft_eula), and ensure that `/home/minecraft/eula.txt` contains the text `eula=true` by hardcoding the string `eula=true\n` into your `minecraft.pp`.

### Part d: Installing the Minecraft Server

Ensure that /home/minecraft/server.jar contains the Minecraft Server, available at https://launcher.mojang.com/v1/objects/3dc3d84a581f14691199cf6831b71ed1296a9fdf/server.jar. 
Note that the `source` parameter of the `file` resource accepts a URL as its argument.

### Part e: Templating a systemd unit file

Copy the below following template into the same directory into your `minecraft.pp` file as `minecraft.service.erb`.

Edit the file to be a proper `erb` template, so that `<INSERT YOUR RAM AMOUNT HERE>` becomes the value of the `$memory_available`
variable when puppet runs.

Now edit your `minecraft.pp` file, so that it sets the `$memory_available` variable to be the
total amount of RAM available to the system, and that it puts the templated file into `/etc/systemd/systemd/minecraft.service`.

Hint: The `content` parameter to the `file` resource allows file contents to be specified from a string, and the `template` function
takes a __absolute__ path and uses the variables currently in scope to template the file.

Look at the `/etc/systemd/systemd/minecraft.service` to ensure it contains the contents you want before proceeding.

Note that the systemd unit file does not have a proper ExecStop, which maybe result in some world corruption.

```
[Unit]
Description=Minecraft Server

Wants=network.target
After=network.target

[Service]
User=minecraft
WorkingDirectory=/home/minecraft
# This should look like ExecStart=/usr/bin/java -Xmx4096M -Xms4096M -jar server.jar
ExecStart=/usr/bin/java -Xmx<INSERT YOUR RAM AMOUNT HERE>M -Xms<INSERT YOUR RAM AMOUNT HERE>M -jar server.jar
ExecStop=/bin/kill -- $MAINPID
TimeoutStopSec=5

[Install]
WantedBy=multi-user.target
```

### Part f: Running the service

Ensure that the `minecraft.service` systemd service is enabled and started. It should only run when both the systemd unit file, and the
`server.jar` are present in the file system. When either the systemd unit file or the `server.jar` file changes, the
service should refresh.

Hint: Use `File[<path>]` to refer to an existing `file` resource.

### Part g: Backups

We should backup our minecraft server!

Ensure there is a directory `/home/minecraft/backups/`
Use puppet to add a cron entry to execute the following command every minute as the minecraft user.
Ensure that this only happens 

```sh
bash -c 'cp -r /home/minecraft/world "/home/minecraft/backups/world-$(date -Is)"'
```
The command copies the directory containing into the minecraft world into a subdirectory of `backups` indexed by the current
date. 
## Part 3: Submission

Congratulations! You have a working Minecraft server, and some backups!

Copy paste the code you have for each part into the gradescope submission!
